Towards P2719R3 (#9)
ldionne/wg21: p2719.md

  - Allowed `std::type_identity` parameter for in-class `T::operator new` for consistency
  - Made `std::type_identity` as the first parameter
  - Documented design choices and changes based on feedback and implementation experience
- R2:
  - ...
- R3:
  - Added design choice section for constant expression evaluation
  - Added design choice section for coroutine promise new/delete

>   - Update to explicitly discard qualifiers on the type passed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - Explicitly mention that qualifiers are discarded on the type being passed
```

  - More comprehensive wording
    - Include feature detection macro

>     - Better explain the content of the type-identity parameter in expr.new and expr.delete

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Better explain the content of the type-identity parameter in [expr.new] and [expr.delete]
```

    - Make it explicit that a type aware operator delete cannot be a destroying delete

>     - update const.expr include language to permit use of type aware functions in constant

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    - Update [const.expr] include language to permit use of type aware functions in constant
```

audience=CWG}

> [1]{.pnum} An allocation function [or allocation function template]{.add}[that is not a class
> member function]{.rm} shall [either]{.add} belong to the global scope and not have a name with
> internal linkage [or be a class member function]{.add}. The [declared]{.add} return type shall be
> [the non-dependent type]{.add} `void*`. [A non-template allocation function shall have at least
> one parameter, and an allocation function template shall have at least two parameters. If the
> first parameter is of type `std::type_identity<T>` for some type `T` there shall be at least two
> parameters; the first parameter is called the _type-identity parameter_, and the second parameter
> is called the _size parameter_. Otherwise, the first parameter is called the _size 
> parameter_.]{.add} The [first]{.rm} [size]{.add} parameter shall have [the non-dependent]{.add}
> type `std::size_t` ([support.types]{.unnumbered .sref}). [The first parameter shall not]{.rm}
> [Neither the type-identity parameter, if present, nor the size parameter shall]{.add} have an
> associated default argument ([dcl.fct.default]{.unnumbered .sref}). [The type-identity parameter

> > represents the type being allocated, such that allocating an object or array of type `T`, the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> represents the type being allocated, such that when allocating an object or array of type `T`, the
```

> the requested size of the allocation. [An allocation function can be a function template. Such a
> template shall declare its return type and first parameter as specified above (that is, template
> parameter types shall not be used in the return type and first parameter type). Allocation
> function templates shall have two or more parameters.]{.rm}

## basic.stc.dynamic.deallocation

Updates for [basic.stc.dynamic.deallocation]{.unnumbered .sref}

[As with the changes to [basic.stc.dynamic.allocation]{.unnumbered .sref} the intent of this
wording is to permit the first parameter to be a `std::type_identity` specialization as long
as we can identify this as a specialization of `std::type_identity` prior to any template
instantiation.]{.draftnote audience=CWG}

> [3]{.pnum}Each deallocation function shall return `void`. [A deallocation function shall have at
> least one parameter. If the first parameter is of type `std::type_identity<T>` for some type `T`,
> there shall be at least two parameters; the first parameter is called the _type-identity
> parameter_, the second parameter is called the _address parameter_. Otherwise, the first parameter

> > is called the _address parameter_. If the function has a type-identity parameter it is not a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> is called the _address parameter_. If the function has a type-identity parameter, it is not a
```

> after the [first]{.rm}[address parameter]{.add} are
>
>  - [3.1]{.pnum}optionally, a parameter of type std​::​destroying_delete_t, then
>  - [3.2]{.pnum}optionally, a parameter of type std​::​size_t, then
>  - [3.3]{.pnum}optionally, a parameter of type std​::​align_val_t.
>
> A destroying operator delete shall be a usual deallocation function. A deallocation function may
> be [an instance of a function template]{.rm}[templated]{.add}. Neither the
> [first]{.rm}[address]{.add} parameter nor the return type shall depend on a template parameter.
> A deallocation function [template shall have two or more function parameters]{.rm}
> [can be a function template. Such a function template shall have at least two parameters, and
> declare its address parameter as specified above]{.add}. A template instance [is never a usual
> deallocation function, regardless of its signature.]{.rm}[is only a usual deallocation function
> if it has a type-identity parameter, and the type-identity parameter is a dependent type (i.e. the
> type-identity parameter may be of type `std::type_identity<T>` where `T` shall be a dependent

> > type), and the type-identity is the only dependent parameter.]{.add}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> type), and the type-identity parameter is the only dependent parameter.]{.add}
```

>    first]{.rm} argument is the amount of space requested, and has type `std​::​size_t`.
>  - [21.2]{.pnum old=""} If the type of the allocated object has new-extended alignment, the next
>    argument is the type's alignment, and has type `std​::​align_val_t`. If the new-placement syntax
>    is used, the initializer-clauses in its expression-list are the succeeding arguments. If no
>    matching function is found then
>
>    - [21.2.1]{.pnum old=20.1} if the allocated object type has new-extended alignment, the alignment
>      argument is removed from the argument list;
>
>    - [21.2.2]{.pnum old=20.2} otherwise, an argument that is the type's alignment and has type
>      `std​::​align_val_t` is added into the argument list immediately after the size argument;
>
>    - [21.2.3]{.pnum old=""} and then overload resolution is performed again.

[end the added inset + new sublist]{.draftnote}

::: add
>  - [21.3]{.pnum} If no matching function was found and the type-identity argument was present in
>    the argument list, the above overload resolution steps are repeated without the type-identity

> >    argument`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
>    argument.
```

:::

> [29]{.pnum} A declaration of a placement deallocation function matches the declaration of a
> placement allocation function if it has the same number of parameters and, after parameter
> transformations ([dcl.fct]{.unnumbered .sref}), all parameter types except [the first]{.rm}[the
> size and object]{.add} are identical.

> > [30]{.pnum} If a new-expression calls a deallocation function it passes [the type-identity as the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> [30]{.pnum} If a new-expression calls a deallocation function it passes [the type-identity argument as the
```

> first argument if it was passed to the allocation function, and]{.add} the value returned from
> the allocation function call as the [first argument]{.rm}[argument for the address parameter]{.add}
> of type `void *`.

[The following restriction was not discussed in Wroclaw, but we believe is a useful hazard
restriction given the lack of any mechanism to otherwise force co-definition of new and delete

> operators]{.draftnote audience=CWG&EWG}

Reviewer: While I think that this restriction is great, the right way to call it out to EWG is not in a drafting note. We'd need to add a small Design subsection where we discuss that change.

Author: - [ ] todo

> object of A otherwise. [If the deallocation function is not a destroying operator delete and the
> deleted object is not the most derived object in the former case, the behavior is undefined, as
> stated above.]{.note}
> [If the selected function is type aware, then it will be called with the type-identity argument
> as the first argument to the call]{.add}. For an array delete expression, the deleted object is
> the array object. When a delete-expression is executed, the selected deallocation function shall
> be called with the address of the deleted object in a single-object delete expression, or the
> address of the deleted object suitably adjusted for the array allocation overhead ([expr.new]) in
> an array delete expression, as [the]{.add}[its]{.rm} first argument [following the type identity
> argument if present]{.add}.

## expr.const

[Supporting type aware new and delete in constant expressions was discussed, but this section was
not present in the drafts presented at the Wroclaw meeting. For system allocators this is something
that needs to be supported. In principle vendor extensions would be able support the required use

> case pending a more universally applicable constexpr operator new/operator delete story.]{.draftnote audience=EWG}

Reviewer: This drafting note is unnecessary. The right way to call out that we want this recorded explicitly is to add it to the design choices like you've done below, and to get re-scheduled in EWG just for confirm that choice.

Author: - [ ] todo

Since this adds complexity to the proposal and implementation and doesn't provide great value, we are not
pursuing it as part of this proposal.

## Design choice: Allowing type aware allocation functions in constant expressions

> In the current specification it is not possible for an author to specify a constexpr `operator new`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Design choice: Allowing type aware allocation functions in constant expressions

**New since Wroclaw**

In the current specification it is not possible for an author to specify a constexpr `operator new`
```

or `operator delete`. Instead, using a _new-expression_ or a _delete-expression_ in a `constexpr`

> context requires that the resolved operator be `::operator new` / `::operator delete`. In particular,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
context requires that the resolved operator be `::operator new` / `::operator delete`, and the compiler elides the call entirely. In particular,
```

if an in-class `T::operator new` is defined and the _new-expression_ resolves to it, the
_new-expression_ is not `constexpr`-friendly. That seems to be an arbitrary limitation.

We clearly don't want or need such a limitation for typed `operator new`. Our solution to that is to
treat a global typed `operator new` (without placement parameters) just like an untyped
`::operator new`, i.e. as a _replaceable global allocation function_. While that does mean the
compiler will assume the behaviour of typed `operator new`, that seems like a reasonable assumption
inside `constexpr`. We apply the same rationale to `operator new[]`, `operator delete`, and
`operator delete[]` in order to fully support type aware allocators where existing global allocators
are supported.

## Design choice: Stripping qualifiers from the type

> There is a question as to whether the type-identity should include qualifiers. In previous drafts

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Design choice: Stripping qualifiers from the type

**New since Wroclaw**

There is a question as to whether the type-identity should include qualifiers. In previous drafts
```

this was not addressed, and retaining the qualifiers was implied. After consideration we have
realised that this would be surprising, is inconsistent with how the type being allocated is
presented to the developer throughout the process of allocation and deallocation, and results in the
type-identity trivially diverging between such allocation and deallocation e.g.

```cpp
const T *t = new T;
...
delete t;
```

## Design choice: Safety restriction on mismatched declaration scopes

This restriction was not discussed in Wroclaw, but we believe is a useful hazard restriction given
the lack of any mechanism to otherwise force co-definition of new and delete operators. In [expr.new
]{.unnumbered .sref} we would like to add the follow paragraph to force the selected deletion

> operator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Design choice: Safety restriction on mismatched declaration scopes

**New since Wroclaw**

There is currently no language mechanism to enforce that `operator new` and `operator delete` are defined as a pair. That is a potential source of confusion and bugs. However, since we are introducing a new form of `operator new` and `operator delete`, we are free to change these rules, and it would be simple to do so. In [expr.new
]{.unnumbered .sref} we suggest adding the follow paragraph to force the selected `operator delete` to be in the same scope as its matching `operator new`. We believe that the vast majority of use cases will already assume that's the case, and this would only catch a potentially common misuse.
```

::: add
> [31]{.pnum} If a single matching deallocation is found and either the allocation function or the
> deallocation function has a type-identity parameter, then both functions shall belong to the same

> > scope ([basic.scope.scope]{.sref .unnumbered}), otherwise the program is ill formed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> scope ([basic.scope.scope]{.sref .unnumbered}), otherwise the program is ill-formed.
```

:::

> ## Design choice: Permit sized delete when performing exception cleanup delete
> 
> [@P3492R0] Discusses the problem of placement delete being unable to call sized delete. As a new
> syntax and function signature there is no risk of conflict with existing code. We could resolve
> [@P3492R0] by permitting a sized delete to be called during cleanup of placement new. The wording
> currently lacks this, and we lack direct implementation experience, but introducing support today
> might reduce problems in the future.
> 
> The wording changes would likely be to [expr.new]{.sref .unnumbered}, something along the lines of
> 
> > [29]{.pnum} A declaration of a placement deallocation function matches the declaration of a
> > placement allocation function if it has the same number of parameters and, after parameter
> > transformations ([dcl.fct]{.unnumbered .sref}), all parameter types except [the first]{.rm}[the
> > size and object]{.add}[, and optionally a parameter of type `std::size_t` immediately
> > following the address parameter]{.add} are identical.
> 
> An alternative would be to mandate all currently "optional" parameters become mandatory for type
> aware allocation functions, however we feel that that considerably increases mental load of the
> feature, and more over that mandates sized delete, even though there are cases where it is not
> possible for the author or compiler to know the size of the object ahead of time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

This opens up a significant design space. I think it's too late to try addressing this in C++26.

}
```

There are too many ways in which an unconstrained declaration like this can break, including an
unexpected set of associated namespaces or even a mere `using namespace lib;`.

Given the need to constrain a type-aware operator anyway, we believe that allowing namespace-scoped
operators is merely a nice-to-have but not something that we need fundamentally. Furthermore, adding
this capability to the language could always be pursued as a separate proposal since that concern
can be tackled orthogonally. For example, a special ADL lookup could be done based solely on the
dynamic type being [de]allocated.

Since this adds complexity to the proposal and implementation and doesn't provide great value, we
are not pursuing it as part of this proposal.

## Design choice: Allowing type aware allocation functions in constant expressions

> In the current specification it is not possible for an author to specify a constexpr `operator new`
> or `operator delete`, and instead use of `new` and `delete` in constant expressions requires that
> the resolved operator be a replaceable global allocation function [expr.const]{.unnumbered .sref}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the current specification it is not possible for an author to specify a constexpr `operator new`
or `operator delete`. Instead, using a _new-expression_ or a _delete-expression_ in a `constexpr` context requires that
the resolved operator be `::operator new` / `::operator delete`. In particular, if an in-class `T::operator new` is defined and the _new-expression_ resolves to it, the _new-expression_ is not `constexpr`-friendly. That seems to be an arbitrary limitation.
```

This already causes problems for class scoped operators as the existence of a correctly named
operator in the class scope prevents any further lookup in the global scope. However it is possible
for code that wishes to support allocation in constant and custom operators with code of the form:

 ```cpp
 template <typename T>
 constexpr int example() {
    T* value;
    if consteval {
        value = ::new T;
    } else {
        value = new T;
    }
    // Do work
    if consteval {
      ::delete value;
    } else {
      delete value;
    }
    return result;
}

>  ```

Reviewer: Now this paragraph + example can go away.

Which, while distasteful and verbose, does work.

> However this proposal introduces the possibility, and for some use cases the probability,
> of finding matching operators for non-placement new in the global scope and so being
> unusable in constant expressions. As a result we risk putting developers in the unreasonable
> position of having to choose between two different language features, both of which are
> extremely valuable.
> 
> Our solution is to treat type aware global allocators that have no placement parameters as if they
> are replaceable global operators, and as such permit them to be assumed to behave in a like manner.
> In addition to permitting general global type aware allocators without breaking dynamic allocation
> in constant evaluation, this also provides a path to supporting class specialized allocators without
> sacrificing usability in constant evaluation contexts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We clearly don't want or need such a limitation for typed `operator new`. Our solution to that is to treat a global typed `operator new` (without placement parameters) just like an untyped `::operator new`, i.e. as a _replaceable global allocation function_. While that does mean the compiler will assume the behaviour of typed `operator new`, that seems like a reasonable assumption inside `constexpr`.
```

> Possible alternative approaches, that might also be useful for other contexts (static analysis,

Reviewer: I would remove this and keep it for a follow-up paper treating constant expressions and `operator new` specifically. There's no need to try solving these adjacent problems in this paper, and that only muddies the waters.

debug tooling, etc) would be:

- an attribute that can be applied to allocation functions to declare that they can be treated as if
  they are usual allocation functions in constant evaluation (or other?) contexts
- allow constexpr type aware allocation functions in constant evaluation, as the functions have the
  access to the type being allocated so are able to use `std::allocator`, e.g:
  ```cpp

>   void *operator new(std::type_identity<X> type, size_t sz) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  constexpr void *operator new(std::type_identity<X> type, size_t sz) {
```

Author: derp

    if consteval {
      std::allocator<decltype(type)::type> alloc;
      return alloc.allocate(sz);
    }
    ...
  }
  ```
  This only works as std::allocator is stateless so the allocation lifetime can outlive the
  std::allocator's lifetime. A further downside to this losing the ability to ensure matching

>   allocation and deallocation functions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion

```

- allow dynamic allocation in constexpr contexts via calls to `::operator new(size_t)` and
  `::operator delete(void*)` or some similar function, and then permit use of constexpr operator
  `new` or `delete`. This would allow custom allocators _if_ they are inline, even when not type
  aware. e.g
  ```cpp
  class Foo {
    constexpr void* operator new(size_t sz, SomeContext Ctx) {
      if consteval {
        return ::operator new(sz);
      }
      // Do custom allocation work
      // ...
    }
  }
  ```
  We have a [basic implementation](https://github.com/swiftlang/llvm-project/tree/users/ojhunt/P2719-constexpr-allocation) of this concept however we're not absolutely certain that this
  is the best long term solution.
These are simply the most obvious solutions, and more comprehensive solutions likely exist, so

> addressing this fully is outside of the scope of this feature.

Reviewer: This can be moved to a `Future Work` section.

Author: - [ ] todo

## Design choice: Stripping qualifiers from the type

> There is a question as to whether the type-identity should include qualifiers. In previous drafts
> this was not addressed, and retaining the qualifiers was implied. After consideration we have 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There is a question as to whether the type-identity should include qualifiers. Previous drafts of this paper implied that the qualifiers were retained. After consideration we have 
```

this proposal has dropped the ADL lookup, declarations of type-aware operators must now be in-class
or global. This greatly simplifies the selection of an operator, which should make it harder for
users to unexpectedly define an insufficiently constrained operator without immediately getting a
compilation error.

Furthermore, without ADL lookup, the ODR implications of this proposal are exactly the same as the
existing ODR implications of user-defined placement new operators, which can be templates.

## Impact on the library

This proposal does not have any impact on the library, since this only tweaks the search process
performed by the compiler when it evaluates a new-expression and a delete-expression. In particular,
we do not propose adding new type-aware free function `operator new` variants in the standard
library at this time, althought this could be investigated in the future.

## Interactions with coroutines

Coroutines currently permit user defined allocators, but do not have a mechanism to communicate the
type being allocated. For P2719 we are not adjusting the semantics of coroutine allocations to

> resolve type aware new or delete. The coroutine specification will need to be updated in future to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
resolve type aware new or delete. The coroutine specification will need to be updated in the future to
```

compiler when it evaluates a new-expression and a delete-expression. In particular, we do not propose adding new
type-aware free function `operator new` variants in the standard library at this time, althought this could be
investigated in the future.

## Interactions with coroutines

> Coroutines currently permit user defined allocators, but do not have a mechanism to communicate the
> type being allocated. For P2719 we are not adjusting the semantics of coroutine allocations to
> resolve type aware new or delete. The coroutine specification will need to be updated in the future to
> determine what type will be passed, and to include that type in the allocation function resolution
> (similar to what is achievable through `decltype(lambda)`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Coroutines currently allow using a custom `operator new` and `operator delete` for allocating the coroutine frame. That is done by looking up in the coroutine's promise type for `Promise::operator new`. However, there is no mechanism to communicate the type being allocated, since that type is only something known by the compiler (and fairly late during translation). This paper does not propose changing how allocation for coroutine frames is customized. In the future, the coroutine specification could be updated to make the type being allocated more visible and to use a typed allocation function, but there is significant enough design space to avoid doing that here.
```

> # Future work
> 
> This proposal has exposed a number of gaps in the current language specification, that would ideally
> be addressed in future proposals.
> 
> ## Coroutine frame types
> 
> Coroutines explicitly resolve `operator new` and `operator delete` independently of other resolution
> paths, but even when that resolution is performed they do not provide any type information about the
> allocation being performed. From discussions with multiple vendors, the exact content of the promise
> frame being allocated is not determined until _after_ front end and semantic analysis has occured: the
> content of the type being allocated is determined by the codegenerator.
> 
> Given those semantics it seems implausible that we will ever be able to provide a type that
> accurately reflects the exact type being allocated, however for type aware allocators being able to
> distinguish a coroutine frame from an opaque bucket of bits is critical, as coroutine frames are
> analagous to stack frames and can contain critical data - code pointers, post validation spills,
> etc - as well as being subject to all the historical attacks applied to any other stack frame.
> 
> At minimum some degree of tag type will be needed, but it seems likely that at least some metadata
> and queries should be possible prior to codegen, so the exact design of the type requires discussion
> that is outside the scope of this proposal.
> 
> ## constexpr allocation functions
> 
> In order to support functional requirements of a system allocator, this proposal adds wording to
> special case globally defined type aware allocation functions that are filling the space usually
> reserved for the _global replaceable allocation functions_. This wording is necessary as the current
> specification language explicitly precludes any _new-_ or _delete-expression_ where the resolved
> operator is not explicitly a globally replaceable allocation function.
> 
> This restriction is not necessary as constexpr `new` and `delete` are both implementable via the
> constexpr `std::allocator` API, or via direct calls to `::operator new(...)` and
> `::operator delete(...)`. As a result of this restriction no class, or class hierarchy, may be used
> during constant expression evaluation, because the mere existence of the class scoped allocation
> function precludes lookup from ever reaching the global scope. This means that any scenarios where
> such a type must be used in a constant evaluation context must be forced to use a global operators,
> potentially leading to security or correctness errors, or must use copious `if consteval` blocks
> through out otherwise clean code.

Reviewer: I think this is extremely interesting, however it's also not really related to this proposal. I don't think it's really useful to add this information here. You should instead note this down and come back with proposals to address this in the future (if you think it's worth it).

```suggestion

```

# Acknowledgments

> We'd like to acknowledge the time spent by Jens Meurer, Brian Bi, Corentin Jabot, Richard Smith,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We'd like to acknowledge the time spent by Jens Maurer, Brian Bi, Corentin Jabot, Richard Smith,
```
